Journalism in a pandemic: Covering COVID-19 now and in the future 
MOOC organized by The Knight Center,
in partnership with UNESCO and WHO,
with support from the Knight Foundation and UNDP   
May 4 - May 31, 2020 

Introduction
This module will provide an overview of the course, including the syllabus, a promo video and a welcome video explaining what students will learn week to week.


Goals
In this four-week course, attendees will review the recent history of the COVID-19 pandemic, examine the past warnings that could have prevented or mitigated it, review excellent journalism done to this point, hear from scientific experts from academic research and from the World Health Organization regarding key things to know to begin or continue covering COVID-19, and come away with an extensive menu of tips and recommendations for doing their own stories on the pandemic, no matter their experience or beats. The course will provide journalists with tools to dispel disinformation, misinformation and myths created around COVID-19.


Objectives
At the conclusion of this course, attendees should be able to:

Integrate knowledge from many sources to understand the history of the COVID-19 pandemic to this point;
Evaluate competing claims made for new scientific research and analyze its usefulness to the course of the pandemic;
Relate the main story lines of the COVID-19 pandemic to their particular beats and interests, whether medical, political, social or financial;
Understand the perils of misinformation and disinformation around COVID-19, as well as dangers to freedom of expression and journalists' safety;
Design a plan for covering COVID-19 from this point, applying the local context of their newsrooms and political systems;
Participate in a worldwide community of journalists covering COVID-19 in order to share insights and practical experience.

Tools/Applications Required
This course only requires you to have access to an Internet connection and a web browser.


How the course works
First of all, note that this is an asynchronous course. That means there are no live events scheduled at specific times. You can log in to the course and complete activities throughout the week at your own pace, at the times and on the days that are most convenient for you.

Despite its asynchronous nature, there are still structures in place for the duration of the course.

The material is organized into four weekly modules. Each module will be taught by Maryn McKenna with the assistance of guest speakers and assistant instructors speaking Spanish, Portugese and French, and will cover a different topic through videos, presentations, readings and discussion forums. There will be a quiz each week to test the knowledge you've gained through the course materials. The weekly quizzes, and weekly participation in the discussion forums, are the basic requirements for earning a certificate of participation at the end of the course.

This course is very flexible, and if you are behind with the materials, you have the entire length of the course to complete them. We do recommend you complete each of the following before the end of each week so you don’t fall behind:

Video lectures
Readings and handouts/exercises
Participation in the discussion forums
Quizzes covering concepts from video lectures and/or readings

The course is divided into four weekly modules

Introduction Module: Course Introduction
This module will provide an overview of the course, including the syllabus, a promo video and a welcome video explaining what students will learn week to week. 


Module 1: Where did COVID-19 come from?
This module will cover the past history of pandemics and disasters in the 20th century, examining how the world responded to influenza, smallpox, polio and HIV, and will ask whether governments implemented plans they made to respond to future pandemics, and what was missed.


Module 2: Covering COVID-19 right now
This module will examine the unfolding of the 2020 pandemic in its first four months, addressing healthcare crises, international supply chains, and debates over social distancing and mask-wearing, with special attention to how governments with differing levels of resources have responded in different parts of the world. It will also address the importance of protecting freedom of expression and detecting and combating misinformation and disinformation about the pandemic.

Module 3: The hope for treatments and vaccines
This module will examine the competing claims for treatments or COVID-19, including drugs now on the market as well as those entering trials, and will explain the timeline to achieving a vaccine and an antibody test intended to prove immunity. It will also examine the role of hype and media bias in advancing and debunking some proposed treatments.

Module 4: Coronavirus: The way forward
The difficult reality is that COVID-19 may have changed societies forever in ways both small and large, from whether we shake hands to how we structure family living situations, conduct education and distribute food. This module will propose the most important story angles to be considered, across a number of beats, in the weeks, months, and two years from the current moment. It will also address the critical issue of journalists’ self-care as the emergency continues.
