「パンデミックにおけるジャーナリズム：COVID-19の今と未来を取材する」の最初のラウンドへようこそ。
科学ジャーナリストでTEDスピーカー、作家のソニア・シャーさんです。
彼女の著書には「人類五〇万年の闘い マラリア全史」と最新作「次なる大移動」があります。6月に発売されます。ソニアさん、来てくれてありがとう。

呼んでくれてありがとう。

あなたはパンデミックの可能性を検証する本を出版している希少なジャーナリストなんですね。私はそれにとても興味があります。警告を発してきた事態がまさに今、あなたの周りで展開しています。
そうあるべきではないし、不気味で驚くべき状況です。他の皆さんも同じように感じていることでしょう。シュールな体験ですが、私にとっては歴史の残響でもあります。
私の念頭には常に他の（パンデミックの）出来事があります。ですから、あまり驚きはありませんが、それでもとてもシュールで不気味ですね。

この４ヶ月の出来事を見てみたいと思います。私たちは中国の外側にいます。（感染拡大から）ちょうど４ヶ月が過ぎようとしています。
あなたが行った過去の報道を裏付けるものは何だと思いますか？また、何か驚くようなことはありましたか？

多くのことが知られるようになってきています。つまりこの病気の広がり方はとてもよく知られるようになってきているのです。
貿易や旅行に伴う移動は、私たちが長い間過小評価してきた脅威です。政策立案者は、感染が広がると国境を閉鎖しました。このことは疫病の広がり方を象徴しています。
中国人、悪い科学者、陰謀論、移民、移動する人々と、私たちは非難の応酬に明け暮れています。
よくある話です。生物医学的な治療法を探求することで、私たちはその全てから救われることができるのです。
That also is very familiar. But what really surprised me about the way this pandemic is
unfolding is the huge political failure in the United States. I think that really was not expected. You
know, I think we've all been kind of confused about the US response and, you know, the the
political moment we're in where we have all of these right wing populist leaders around the world
and how that's kind of complicating the responses to the pandemic. That has actually been pretty
surprising and unexpected.
As I look back, I realize that I myself have been writing about the possibility of a pandemic for a
good portion of my career. And in all the different sort of models and possibilities that I gamed out
for myself, the fact that the U.S. government would be essentially absent, and certainly the CDC
would be absent or not visible, those were never among the possibilities that I consider.
It's absolutely amazing, amazing, amazing how quickly those institutions in those, you know,
governance structures have just completely crumbled and become morphed into this whole other
thing, like, you know, propagandizing or, you know, just using, using policy as a political weapon.
That happened very quickly.
So I remember that in your book Pandemic, you wrote about how political leaders make choices
about quarantines, that they decide between predictable costs and unpredictable benefits, which
is a lovely phrase.
So I'm wondering through that lens, how do you view the very different choices that have been
made to respond to this around the world about lockdown, social distancing? To what degree
movement should be free? We've just been talking about the U.S. response, but from China to
Italy to Sweden to South America, there's an enormous menu of different ways that governments
have responded. 
I mean, I think what happened is, you know, I don't have any I don't have a clear sense of it yet. I
think we're just so sort of in the moment right now and still trying to understand what's driving a
lot of the policy responses.
But I feel what happened is without the US kind of giving an alternate way of dealing with this
pandemic that the Chinese model really kind of took, took sort of center stage. And so we saw I
think a lot of countries are kind of responding in reaction to the Chinese models, like do we do the
lockdown or do we not, you know, rather than looking at, well, what is our demographic situation?
What is the age structure of our population like? How many ICU beds do we really have? How
many ventilators do we have, you know? Giving a kind of differentiated response, I think what
we're seeing is a lot of political response. So, you know, countries sort of deciding, well, the
political costs of inaction are really high because we all saw what happened in Italy and we all
saw what happened in, you know, X, Y, Z, a place that looked really bad to our population. And so
we need to do something.
And I think there's just a lot of just reaction, sort of reflexive reaction, actionism for, you know,
action, reaction sake sort of thing, because, you know, the costs, of course, are of lockdown are
huge, but they're also differentiated. So, you know, they're falling heaviest, on poor people,
marginalized people, small businesses. You know, we see a lot of the big businesses are actually
doing OK. Some of them are actually even growing. So I think all of those are playing a role. It's
not as simple as, you know, economic costs upfront for a future public health benefit. There's all
this politics going on as well.
So let's switch for a minute from the politics to the science. In your book, Pandemic, you also
talked about the difficulty of reforming surveillance systems. The idea is that we try to detect
pandemic pathogens emerging from the animal worlds, as this one did. And as the original
pathogen of MERS did and SARS did and Ebola did. So do you have any thoughts about what
the possibility might have been of detecting this virus as it spilled over into humans and what
ought to be done to detect the next spillover, which we know is coming? We just don't know
when.
I mean, we know that scientists, for example, with Eco Health Alliance were in, you know, parts of
China, they were studying antibodies of coronavirus antibodies in local populations there. And
they found about 3 percent or in some places in China have antibodies to different corona viruses
that they were tracking. Now, would they have found this one if they were still doing that work, if it
was if it's still been funded? I mean, it's impossible to say. But, you know, these things can
happen by accident. But of course, they're driven by these larger social, political and economic
forces. And those have been progressing sort of with except accelerated momentum over time.
So, you know, you can't say for sure, of course, that we would we would have caught this one.
Maybe we would have. Maybe we wouldn't have. But the fact is that we had a program out there
and that was looking for these spillover pathogens and especially from bats to people, you know,
that was work that was going on. And the funding was pulled and it sort of fell apart. So, you
know, we can we can only speculate what might have been if if they had continued doing that
work and if we had to actually strengthen that research capacity.
Right. So we were talking before we officially started taping about how many people are taking
this course on the day in which we're speaking. It's about 5000 people.
And they're coming literally from all over the world, understanding that that's an awfully wide
spectrum.
Do you have any thoughts for the journalists who are taking this course about what angles or
what stories they ought to be pursuing within their local context to throw the most light on the
circumstances of this pandemic?
I mean, I think in general, we need to look for the the the stories that are, you know, being sort of
suppressed, right. So the people who are suffering the brunt, who are not in the limelight
anymore. So we need to look at people in detention, refugees, asylum seekers, homeless
populations, you know, all these marginalized populations that are really hard to reach in normal
times. And it's even harder now. But the other main thing I think is we need to kind of broaden the 
expertise that we're drawing on for a lot of stories, you know? I think it's really easy to go to lots
of virus. So find a virologist or it's it's an epidemic. Go to the epidemiologists. It's and economic
crises, go to the economist. But we also can draw on medical anthropologists and global health
lawyers and bioethicists. And, you know, there's just like a large range of other people who have
expertise in this area. And also just a really important contribution to how you think strategically
about what's going on. So I think we need to kind of expand out, because right now, we're in this
moment where a lot of journalists are suddenly reporting on epidemics when they hadn't done
that before. So I think we need to drop, you know, just to kind of expand the kind of sources that
we look to to actually shed light on what's going on.
I think it's great advice, especially because we don't want to be quoting the same people that
everyone else is quoting. Right. One of my first, actually, one of my favorite stories that I've done
in the past month was talking to a couple of medical historians about lessons from the past
couple of pandemics and and particularly to about vaccination campaigns and how that might
inform what we do if we get a vaccine here. So last question, one author to another, I would love
to hear a bit about your next book, and especially if you can relate your next book to what's going
on right now.
Well, yeah, so I wrote The Fever, which is about malaria that came out in 2010, and then I wrote
Pandemic, which is about emerging infectious diseases that came out in 2016. And one thing that
came out of that work is just this, it became it was very striking to me how much pathogens have
shaped human history. You know, we've accommodated pathogens over time in so many different
ways, whether it's through genetic mutations that we carry around with us that make us, you
know, at risk of modern diseases today or changing our settlement patterns or, you know, the list
kind of goes on and on about how pathogens are really shaped, our society and our behaviors.
But one thing that's really striking is that part of the human behavior that pathogens exploit the
most is our mobility. And yet over time, what we've seen is we haven't altered our mobility. If
anything, we've we've moved more and faster and farther. And so I wanted to kind of look at like,
well, why does that, why does that happen? Like, what is the role of human mobility in nature, in
history? You know, considering the great cost, it occurs to us, not just in modern times, not just
with this pandemic or the last pandemic, but just like over our entire history. And so what I wanted
to look as is how climate change is altering migration patterns, not just for people, but also for
wild species. And what role mobility plays in our biological resilience.
I really look forward to reading that. So that's the book.
The Next Great Migration, which comes out in June. And Sonia is also the author, among other
works of Pandemic, which we've been talking about, and The Fever. Thank you so much for being
part of this course. We really appreciate it.
Thank you. 
