Pandemic Module 1 Video Class 1

「パンデミックにおけるジャーナリズム」の最初のモジュールへようこそ。私はアトランタ在住のジャーナリストで著述家のマリーナ・マッケーナです。
このコースのリーダーで、英語版のインストラクターです。これからの４週間のうちに、フランス語版のアソシエイト・インストラクターを務めるイヴ・シアマ、ポルトガル語版担当のアマンダ・ロッシ、スペイン語版のフェデリコ・ククソにもお目にかかれるかもしれません。
みんなを代表して、この度は受講していただきありがとうございます。
今週のトピックに入る前に、このコースがどのように機能するのかちょっとお話しましょう。
このコースの各モジュールでは、事前の備えや対応、可能な予防、そして今後の私たちの生活がどのようになるかまで、パンデミックのあらゆる側面を検証していきます。
私たちの目標は、最高のストーリーのアイデアや、卓越したジャーナリストとしてのスキルと実践について議論することにあります。
しかし、このパンデミックの背後にある病原体は、世界がこれまでに経験したことのないウイルスであり、私たちはこれが他に類を見ない状況であることを理解しています。
したがって、毎週、インストラクターに加え科学者や他の専門家によるパンデミックについての情報と、これを取材するジャーナリストの経験を共有していきます。
このモジュールでは、病気とバイオディフェンス（生物兵器防衛）の著名な専門家であるマイケル・T・オスターホルム氏と、著述家でジャーナリストのソニア・シャー氏の話を聞きます。
最後に、このコースは世界中からの受講者がいます。とてもワクワクしますが、課題もあります。
このパンデミックは世界で拡大しつつありますが、国ごとに状況はさまざまで、それぞれの国が異なる公衆衛生戦略をとっています。
投入するリソースの量もいろいろです。そのため、私たちがお勧めするストーリーのアイデアの中には、あなたがお住まいの場所や今やっている仕事には関係のないものもあるかもしれません。
私たちはあなたがとにかくこのコミュニティで何かを体験しようとか、推奨するストーリーを読もうと食らい付いてきてくれることを願っています。
世界の終わりの読書会のようなものだと思ってください。
前置きはこれくらいにして、さあ始めましょう。まだ2年と経っていない2018年5月中旬、ドイツのフランクフルトにあるウイルスが現れました。
この時期はインフルエンザの流行は終わった後ですが、ウイルスはまるでインフルエンザのように振る舞い、咳やくしゃみを引き起こして、人から人への感染拡大を促しました。
316人が罹患し、うち約10％に当たる32人が死亡しました。
続いて海を隔てたベネズエラのカラカスで、約100人が同じ症状に倒れました。そのうちの何人かは脳症を発症し、脳が腫れて昏睡状態に陥りました。
ベネズエラでは20人が亡くなりました。しかし、同国の大統領は感染症の発生を否定し、感染は拡大を続けました。
夏にベネズエラを訪れた大学生を介して、米国にもウイルスがやってきました。病原体が世界中で猛威を振るう中、保健の専門家は、効果のある治療法がなく、利用可能なワクチンもないことに気付きました。
ワクチンが届くと予想されていた20ヶ月後には、1億5000万人が世界中で死亡したのです。
そんな話を聞いたことがないと混乱しているあなた、どうか安心してください。これは現実に起こったことではありません。
これは2018年5月、ボルチモアのジョンズ・ホプキンス大学の研究者による机上演習で行われたシミュレーションです。
研究者たちはこの架空の病気を「Clade X」と呼んでいましたが、導かれた結論は完全に事実に基づいたものでした。
彼らは「実際にパンデミックをもたらす病原体が発生しても、世界はそれに対する備えができていない」と言ったのです。
今や彼らがどれほど正しかったのか、私たちは知っています。

Clade X was a warning. It laid bare that diseases travel faster than we can track them. That
vaccines cannot be created at a moment's notice. The politics can get in the way of public health.
But its designers said those weaknesses could be fixed, given attention and funding and political
will. Yet, though, their conclusions were reached almost exactly two years ago, almost nothing 
was done to respond to them. Wherever you are working, one of the story opportunities in
covering this pandemic is figuring out whether plans were made and if they were made, whether
they were followed. Clade X wasn't unique. It was one of a long series of warnings about
pandemics that stretch all the way back to the beginning of the 20th century.
If you didn't know about it before, by now, you've probably heard of the 1918 flu pandemic, which
probably started in the United States among troops headed to the First World War and spread
around the world. The 1918 flu killed an estimated one hundred million people. That was the big
pandemic of the last century and a bit, but not the only one. There was an influenza pandemic in
1957 that killed about one and a half million people around the world. There was another in 1968
that killed slightly less than a million. In 1997 H5N1 bird flu jumped to humans in Hong Kong.
Since then, it has killed more than half of those who contracted. And there was the pandemic of
H1N1 flu in 2009, which some of you may remember, which seemed mild at the time, but killed
more than 284,000 people around the world.
Those were all flu pandemics, but there have been other respiratory epidemics in that hundred
plus year span. SARS in 2003, the first coronavirus pandemic arose in southern China, spread
around the globe and sickened slightly more than 8,000 people, killing 774. MERS, also caused
by a coronavirus, was first spotted in Saudi Arabia in 2012 and so far has sickened almost 2500
people, killing 858 of them.
Each of those pandemics contained lessons that we should have internalized before the next
pandemic hit. The 1918 flu and SARS, 85 years later, showed how rapidly pathogens can move
around the world. The 2009 flu, which arrived outside the regular flu season, showed how
complex it is to create a vaccine quickly and how we have to be prepared to keep track of
vaccine side effects.
H5N1 flu and SARS and MERS all established how important it is to monitor the ways that viruses
jump from animals to humans, because any virus that lands in us from another species will be one
that we have no immunity to and no defenses against.
All of those outbreaks and more I haven't mentioned underlined a realization that epidemiologists
around the world had already come to. The number of new diseases that emerge every year is
increasing and the number of outbreaks per year is rising fast. Because of those epidemics, the
World Health Organization developed a pandemic planning guide in 1999 and in 2005. Published
a checklist of actions that its member governments should begin to take. That was supposed to
trigger a pandemic planning by almost every national government in the world. In the United
States, we have had a pandemic plan since 2005, and yet the US and the world continue not to
be ready even after the Ebola epidemic of 2014 in West Africa showed the world how quickly
infectious diseases could spread and destabilise countries and regions.
Here's what billionaire Bill Gates said just afterward.
Today, the greatest risk of global catastrophe doesn't look like this. Instead, it looks like this. If
anything kills over 10 million people in the next few decades, it's most likely to be a highly
infectious virus rather than a war. Not missiles, but microbes. Now, part of the reason for this is
that we've invested a huge amount in nuclear deterrence. We've actually invested very little in a
system to stop an epidemic. We're not ready for the next epidemic.
And here is what the World Bank warned in 2017. We know by now that the world will see another
pandemic in the not too distant future. That random mutations occur often enough in microbes
that help them survive and adapt, that new pathogens will inevitably find a way to break through
our defenses. And yet, as the havoc caused by the last outbreak turns to a fading memory, we
become complacent and relegate the case for investing in preparedness on a backburner. So one
of the big stories of now is, were any of these recommendations followed where you live, whether
it's in the United States or Canada or in Europe or in the global South? Was a plan written? Was it
followed? Did it cover only the nation or did it provide for states and provinces and cities and their
transportation networks and hospitals and their supplies and schools and food?
[00:10:30] Maybe most important. What did it leave out? 
According to an international ranking called the Global Health Security Index, the United States is
the country best equipped in the world to respond to infectious threats. Ranking number 1 out of
one hundred and ninety five jurisdictions. Yet an independent bipartisan council, the CSIS
Commission on Strengthening America's Health Security, said last November, in reality, the
American people are far from safe.
And so it turned out to be.
In 2017, Time magazine warned the world we are not ready for the next pandemic. In 2018 in
Wired magazine, I predicted that if a respiratory pandemic began in China, the world's supply
chains of hospital masks and protective equipment would break down because most of them are
made in China and China would break delivery contracts to keep that equipment where it was
needed.
Sadly, I was right.
You'll find other examples of planning and failures of planning in the recommended and
supplemental readings for this module. We hope they'll guide you to develop story ideas on how
pandemic awareness and planning played out where you are and continue to play out. Take a
look at them. Tell us your thoughts in the discussion forum for this module. And if you happen to
have joined the optional Facebook group, talk to us there too.
How much a pandemic was anticipated or not and how much where you live was left vulnerable
will be key to understanding what we'll talk about in our next module, how COVID-19 is unfolding
right now. 
