こんにちは、MOOC「パンデミックにおけるジャーナリズム：COVID-19の今と未来を取材する」へようこそ。
先週は、過去のパンデミックとそれがもたらすリスク、そしていつかやってくるであろう世界規模の大流行に備えた計画を立てる必要性について話しました。
今週は、実際に発生したパンデミックについて見ていきたいと思います。
それを探るために、世界保健機関（WHO）職員であるシルビー・ブリアン博士、雑誌「サイエンス」の特派員でベルリンを拠点に活動するそれを探るために、世界保健機関（WHO）の職員であるシルヴィ・ブリアン博士、ベルリンに拠点を置く雑誌「サイエンス」の特派員カイ・クプフェルシュミット、
そしてボーナスとして、国際ファクト・チェック・ネットワークのクリスティーナ・タルダギーラがビデオ・セグメントに参加しています。、そして補足として、国際ファクト・チェック・ネットワークのそれを探るために、世界保健機関（WHO）の職員であるシルヴィ・ブリアン博士、ベルリンに拠点を置く雑誌「サイエンス」の特派員カイ・クプフェルシュミットさん、そしてボーナスとして、国際ファクトチェックネットワークのクリスティーナ・タンダギーラさんがビデオ・セグメントに参加しています。
私がこれを記録している時点では、世界で確認された症例数は373万人で、約26万3000人が死亡しています。
皆さんが視聴する頃には、もっと多くなっているでしょう。私が住む米国は、症例数の3分の1を占めており、（感染者の増加を示す）カーブは上昇しています。
国民の大半はそうではありませんが、一部の政治家はロックダウンを解除したいと考えています。
パンデミックが始まった中国・武漢では、1ヶ月間の都市封鎖が解除されています。世界第3位の被害国、イタリアでは5月4日から解除が始まりました。
第5位の被害が出ているフランスは、このモジュールが終わるあたりには解除されるかもしれません。
一方、サハラ以南のアフリカ諸国は、パンデミックがどれほどの被害をもたらすのか、また政府がパンデミックに対処しようとする意志について多くの不確実性を抱えたまま、最悪の（事態の）並を待っています。



In the Student Lounge and the optional Facebook group, many of you have mentioned that you
were covering the experience of the pandemic where you are. That's great. Keep doing it and
keep telling us about your locations or countries strategies in the Discussion Forum where we've
opened up a question about that this week.

What I think we should talk about, though, is why all of your locations strategies are so different.
The reason for that is simple, but easy to forget in this chaos: there is not actually a playbook or a
menu or a script for fighting this. We know too little about the cronavirus. It is simply too new.
Let's remind ourselves of the timeline.
The first notice of the burgeoning epidemic that was published outside China came just before
midnight U.S. time on December 30th, when the international crowdsourcing group PubMed
reproduced several social media rumors that had been confirmed by an announcement by the
Wuhan Municipal Health Committee.
Since then, December 31st, China told the WHO of a pneumonia cluster in Wuhan.
On January 13th, Thailand reported the first case outside China.
On January 21st, the United States identified its first case.
On January 25th, Australia recorded its first case and France identified the first case in Europe.
On January 30th, India reported its first case, and the WHO declared that COVID-19 was a public
health emergency of international concern.
On February 14th, Egypt recorded the first case on the African continent
On February 26. Brazil recorded the first case in South America
On March 11, the WHO declared that COVID-19 is a pandemic
And on March 12th, the Pacific saw its first case, in French Polynesia
That's the geographic spread. This is what the numbers look like.
First cases acknowledged on the 31st of December.
On February 11th, the international death toll was already above a 1,000.
On March 7th, the case count worldwide rose above 100,000.
On March 19th that went to 200,000.
On March 22nd to three hundred thousand.
On March 24th to 400,000.
On April 2nd, to 1 million.
On April 10th, deaths surpassed 100,000.
On April 15th, global cases passed 2 million.
On April 25th, global deaths passed 200,000.
On April 27th, global cases passed 3 million.
We talked last week about the previous international epidemics of corona viruses, SARS and
MERS. Let me underline the point. SARS infected slightly more than 8000 people, killing 774 of
them, in less than six months. MERS has infected almost 2500 people and killed 858 of them so
far.
Compared to COVID-19, those epidemics of similar viruses were short or small or both. That is
significant because it means we didn't extract much information from them.
The overwhelming underlying problem of the novel coronavirus epidemic is that even with all the
science that has been done in the past four months, we are existing in a zone of profound
uncertainty.
We don't know, except in a gross genomic way, why this virus is so different from other
coronaviruses.
We don't know why it hits some people so much harder than others so that some experienced no
symptoms, and others have quick fevers and still others die. We don't know why it has such a
wide range of symptoms, from pneumonia to diarrhea to kidney failure to blood clots to strokes.
We don't actually know how many people have been infected, because not every country is
diligent with testing. We also don't know how many people have recovered. Because of those
data gaps, we can't calculate what the actual risk of death was called the case-fatality rate maybe
- and we haven't done a good job yet of articulating to the public that the case-fatality rate isn't a
static number, but it is affected in different places by what your local demographics are like, or
possibly what your health care system is like.
Let's face it, "case fatality rate" is at base a pretty simple fraction of the kind we learned in
primary school: deaths divided by cases. But if you don't know what the case count is, because
of testing failures, you can't know what the death count is, for the same reason. And it's important
to acknowledge those imprecise counts. Lead to imperfect final numbers. 
Meanwhile, it's also important to acknowledge that almost all of the decisions that governments
are making to this point are based on mathematical models, and those are based on assumptions
and are necessarily imperfect as well. In the United States, one particular set of projections from
the University of Washington has been very influential, but is being doubted now as the
researchers my Maimuna Majumder from the U.S. and Devi Shridhar from the United Kingdom
wrote recently in the British Medical Journal:.
"Modeling is a necessary input to public policy decisions but should be taken as just one input
among many... Leaders must consider the values, needs and preferences of their populations
when deciding whether to follow it.".
Acknowledging the zone of uncertainty we're all living in is especially important right now,
because uncertainty is the door through which misinformation and disinformation enter. The
director of the WHO, Dr. Tedros, has described misinformation and disinformation as a "second
disease" and "infodemic" - and it's a lot, on top of our regular jobs covering this, to have to
function as fact-checkers and debunkers as well.
It's especially hard because some of the misinformation and disinformation you may run into may
seem like it's well-intentioned. It might be family and friends sharing things on social media that
they think will help and will be protective. But we have to acknowledge that some of the misinfo
and disinfo are maliciously intended, often politically inspired, and it's a burden to have to push
back on that as we try to bring accurate coverage to our readers and viewers.
To that end, we hope you'll check out a special package that we've added to the optional
readings for this course.
On World Press Freedom Day, which occurred one week before this module goes live, UNESCO
released a comprehensive briefing package on "Journalism, press freedom and COVID-19,"
addressing all the ways in which bad information is complicating pandemic response.
Their statistics are unnerving.
They found one-third of social media users are aware of having seen fake or misleading
information about the pandemic.
Two-fifths of public social media posts came from unreliable sources.
42% of tweets related to COVID-19 came from bots.
And just in the month of March, 40 million posts related to COVID were identified by Facebook as
being problematic and needing a warning.
We've included UNESCO's full package in the supplemental readings for this module, along with
other materials addressing how to detect disinformation and verify trustworthy content. We hope
you'll take a look and tell us your thoughts about them in the Discussion Forum and the optional
Facebook group.
How we detect and combat misinformation and disinformation are going to be especially
important to what we'll talk about next week: how to assess the news of possible new vaccines
and treatments and how to separate solid news from the hype cycle. 
