「パンデミックにおけるジャーナリズム：COVID-19の現在と未来を取材する」の最新のビデオです。 今回お越しいただいたのははカイ・クーパーシュミットさんです。
ベルリンに拠点を置く雑誌「サイエンス」の特派員です。来てくれてありがとう。
It's a pleasure Maryn.
I'm really curious to know. What's the earliest story you wrote about this pandemic? And is there
a point where you realized this would be your only story for a while?
You know, it's always hard in retrospect to really pin it down, but I wrote the first story about this
on the 9th of January together with two colleagues at Science magazine, and that was the day
that basically the Chinese had announced that it was a novel coronavirus. The sequence wasn't
yet out. It was just about to come out.
And at that point, you know, we still had this discussion about is this human to human
transmission? So basically at the time, it was said that there was no evidence of human to human
transmission.
But already the scientists I was talking to were quite skeptical. And I guess it took a little bit. I
mean, it took a little bit. I was actually on holiday. That's the other thing. I was in Brazil at the time.
And I remember thinking like, OK, this could go either way. And, and kind of hoping it would go
away quietly. And of course, it didn't.
And when I look back now, I think really like the big change for me happened kind of like end of
January and then towards February, like slowly, just a lot of evidence came up that this was, you
know, spreading really well, human to human. You had the first cases outside of China.
And I think I think I wrote a thread about this at the time on Twitter. But like towards the middle of
February 21st or 22nd, I think when Iran announced they had a number of deaths. I think that
several things came together. And that's when I really realized also it was just detecting the shift in
the people I was talking to. So the scientists were just, you know, clearly kind of shifting gears
and saying, OK, this you know, this is a pandemic. I wrote a story a little bit before that where we
kind of we're looking at will China be able to contain this virus or is it going to become a
pandemic? And already at that point, at the beginning of February, I think end of January, it was
kind of clear that most scientists were already skeptical that it could be contained.
So you have been in this, as a result, really from the start. The very first, I think notice to the world
outside of China was very, very late on the day before New Year's Eve when the list pro-med ran a
note saying hearing a couple of things here, something from a health department within China. So
so looking back over that entire four months, are there particular stories you've done or particular
events or trends that really stand out to you?
Well, I think, so, you know, when you look back, sometimes it looks a little bit like everything was,
you know, was so clear from the start. Of course it wasn't. And one moment in particular that I
remember so fairly early on, there was a joint mission from the WHO with scientists from around
the world who went to China. And actually, I remember I was I was going to Brazil that day and I
landed at the airport in Sao Paulo. And I got the email from the WHO that the report was out.
And I started reading it in the car on the way to Sao Paulo. And that really like in retrospect, that
was a big moment, that report, because it really at that time, everybody was unclear what exactly
was happening in China. And that report really said, OK, china has managed to control this and
here's how they did it. And that kind of set the course for the next few months. You know, for
everything that we're seeing now in terms of, you know, shutdowns, lockdowns, social distancing,
whatever you want to call it, that that was not preordained. I mean, I spoke to several of the
authors of that report and they all told me when they went to China, they thought, no way is China
controlling a respiratory disease by, you know, locking down society. That just, you know, it
doesn't work. And when they were there, they realized it had worked. 
So that whole thing, which has become kind of almost the the main story of this particular
pandemic. Right. That that really originated to my mind with that report. And it was interesting,
because when the report came out, I was talking to my editor and my colleagues and I was saying
this report is going to be, you know, the big news story for the next week. This is going to inform
all the debates. And it didn't really. It kind of trickled into the debates more than it, you know, not
that many people covered it. I mean, Bruce Aylward, who headed the joint commission, later gave
a lot of interviews and those kind of slowly. There was an interview in The New York Times. There
was one with VOX. Then those slowly kind of, you know, changed people's perceptions, I think.
But but certainly that was a key moment for me and how this pandemic evolved.
And then, of course, there's there's other ones. Right. I mean, if you look at the U.S., I think the
whole story about the cases in Seattle, when it became apparent that there were a few cases, that
well the first two cases when we had the genomes, they looked like they were linked, even though
they weren't, you know, even though they were separated by a month. I think in time. And then it
kind of became clear that, OK, there's already spread going on in the US. That changed for me,
that changed the whole debate about what was going on in the US, and that's I think you can
identify several of those moments. And, you know, we might be living through some of those
moments right now. It's kind of hard sometimes when you're in the middle of it to know that.
It's really fascinating to me the degree to which just in these four months things that we thought
we knew have been so completely overturned. And from my perspective, it's one of the hardest
things about being a journalist in this epidemic is having to say to people, this is what the
scientists think now and then having to explain not very long afterward. Oh, well, but there's new
evidence that the that the evidence is changing. It's hard for journalists to keep up with. I think it's
hard for the audience to.
But I think that the speed of it is just astonishing. Right. I mean, both both for us, the science
shows. I mean, I'm used to sometimes writing a story that says, listen, what we thought two years
ago about this virus, you know, it turns out it isn't right. But now you're writing that story after a
week because.
Exactly what we said a week ago. Yes. So. So to move us from the timescale of a couple of
weeks or a couple of months to a couple of years, you also covered the 2014 Ebola pandemic.
And I'm really curious from this from the vantage point of now that. What do you think about that
pandemic? And can you compare or contrast the emerging? Are there any lessons you learned in
covering that, that inform what you're doing now?
So, I mean, I think that particular experience. Ebola in Liberia, for me was was one of the most
kind of life changing always sounds so, you know, over the top. But but it changed how I think
about a lot of things. And it still affects me a lot. And when I talk about it.
So, I mean, the first thing for me was, so I have a science background. Right. And I kind of come
at things looking kind of at the virus at the molecular level. That's that's just in terms of the frame,
framework that I have in my mind. So I remember very vividly when when the Ebola outbreak in
West Africa was spiraling out of control. And I was talking to all these scientists and, you know, I
was thinking, so is there a mutation? Has the virus changed? You know, what's going on? You
know, it's fascinating. And it really took a while for me to realize that the virus hadn't changed.
You know, society had changed or it was affecting a society that was working differently from the
societies it had affected before. You know, this was a highly mobile society. You know, lots of
interactions, very distrustful of the government because of its experience with civil wars. You
know, two consecutive civil wars.
And and not just for me, but for a lot of scientists that I talked to at the time, it was really kind of
an experience that that kind of ingrained this idea that we all know that infectious disease is
something that happens when a pathogen and a society kind of, you know, meet. It's what
happened that happens at the interface. But but this really drove home to me, you know, how
much of a difference it makes. And over the years, this has been you know, I've kind of seen this
again and again now, and it's really changed how I look at infectious diseases. So that was one of
the first things. And of course, with the pandemic now what we're seeing is we're seeing it play 
out. You know, the same virus basically could play out in lots of different places, lots of different
societies, people dealing differently with it. And so that framework really, really helps inform me in
looking at what is happening in different places in the world at the moment. I think that's that's
one thing. The other thing and I wrote this fairly on it fairly early on in the pandemic on Twitter, I
think is one of the ironies of a pandemic is that once the virus is everywhere. So in the beginning,
everybody was looking at China. The idea was to contain the virus in China. You how do you do
that? Will it be possible? And then it spread to other places. So you looked at can it be contained
in those places? Of course, once the virus is everywhere, you know, once it goes global, the story
becomes much more local. Because then it's really not about, you know, closing borders or
keeping the virus from going somewhere. It's really about how your community kind of responds
to it. And that's something that, again, I saw in Liberia during the Ebola outbreak that, you know,
also because there wasn't a very strong government and there was this much distrust in the end,
what kind of defeated the virus was. Local communities, you know, adopting certain measures,
like realizing that this was real.
And that's maybe the third thing. Maybe the last thing that I really take from this is I came back to
to Europe during the Ebola outbreak. And, you know, a lot of what people were telling me was
kind of this almost, you know, annoyance at at people in West Africa saying, you know. Jesus,
can they change their behavior? You know what's wrong with them? You know, there's all this all
this talk of this virus isn't real and so on. You know, and and. People didn't realize how hard it was
to change behavior. And you know, how easily misinformation spreads and all of these things.
And now it's kind of ironic to me. You know, one of the big debating points in Ebola in Liberia was
the funeral practices because these funerals really were spreading the virus. And people were
telling me, like, you know, why can't they, you know, have different funerals? Why can't they just,
you know, have crematoria? And, you know, why do they have to have these big funerals where
they kiss goodbye to the loved ones, which is, you know, a very longstanding kind of practice
there. And it's a custom. It's a tradition that's very important to people. And then, you know, a few
years later, we're in Germany and the government is basically saying, you know, you shouldn't go
out drinking with your buddies for a while because of this virus. And people find it hard to even,
you know, not do that. So that's really kind of holds up a mirror. I think also to the kind of
preconceptions that we bring into it when we when we as journalists also report on infectious
diseases in some places.
So is that. That's perfect, because that's exactly what I wanted to ask you next, because you said
and it's such an evocative phrase that disease is what happens when a pathogen meets a society.
And here we have across the globe examples of societies responding to the novel coronavirus so
differently. You live in Berlin. Germany has done an amazing job of controlling the curve of this
epidemic. I'm in the United States. Our response has been a little different. And not just different,
but shocking, I think, to a lot of people, including me, who expected the U.S. would provide more
leadership, the CDC would be more prominent, and all of that is absent. So, from the position of
someone living in Germany with Steinmeier and Merkel who have been such leaders. Do you have
any thoughts about the ways that that Western industrialized societies are responding to this?
Yeah, I mean, for me, you know, I grew up partly in London. So I also often kind of look at the UK
situation and I'm fairly keyed into into the politics there. And then, of course, because I work for
science, you know, I do follow the US situation a lot. And certainly those two countries have been,
you know, disappointing to see. I mean, it's I mean, just in terms of the scientific knowledge that's
there, the kind of I mean, a lot of what we know about corona viruses, a lot of what we know
about modeling and epidemiology, you know, that the people who've done that work are
concentrated in those two countries. A lot of them. So you have some of the best minds in the
world living in two countries that really haven't done well.
And I think, like, you know, I'm not an expert on on the exact politics of populism. But but
certainly something that I've taken away from years of reporting is that, you know, trust is so
important, like trust the government especially, you know, don't forget, we have a virus that we
don't have a vaccine for. We don't have medicine for. All we have are what the scientists called
non-pharmaceutical interventions NPI's and those NPI's rely on, you know, someone telling the
population to change their behavior and the population, you know, trusting that advice, adhering
to it, because they think that it's, you know, that the people who are giving that advice know what
they're doing. So I think the way partly the way that also the role the media has played, both in 
the US and the UK at times, the way that populism has kind of thrived on on this idea that you
can't really trust those in power. And those things have really eroded. You know, that this is this
basic thing that you need in public health, which is trust. That's a reservoir, you know. And when
that's gone, you if you don't have pharmaceutical interventions, you don't have a lot to go on. So
that's been you know, that's been really sad to see. And then and then on top of that, of course,
you have this kind of distrust of elites. I mean, it's kind of interesting that, you know, we're getting
into this pandemic at a time when, you know, a lot of people have argued that, you know, like you
shouldn't trust experts.
You know, there's all of these quotes from from the Brexit debate in the UK about, you know, the
public has had enough of experts and so on. And then and now that I think those chickens are
coming home to roost to a certain extent, it's it's just very hard to for experts to kind of get
through with their advice, even to the politicians. And that's been a huge problem, I think. So in
Germany, of course, we are in a very particular situation. We have a former scientists as as
chancellor. She's done a very good job, I think of. I mean, she just understands how science
basically works. I think, for instance, she can deal with the fact that, like we said earlier, you know,
that the scientific situation, the assessment of what the virus is doing and how it's acting can
change from one week to the next based on new research. And it's very easy if you're a populist
to kind of, you know, use that as a foil and kind of say, see that saying one thing one day and
another thing the other day. But if you're you know, if you're communicating responsibly, you
know, you can you can make the population understand that. And you can you can still have
people, you know, follow the best current advice. I mean, that's all we have. I mean, we've only
known this virus for a few months.
Or a century, it feels like a century industrial.
So I want to I want to follow up on this question as communicating, because the thing that struck
me when I was getting ready for us to talk is how much work you're doing. I mean, not only are
you writing stories for science regularly, but you you are very active on Twitter and often you even
live tweet the WHO press conferences. And that is a lot of work on several different channels. But
I'm curious. So I'm curious if you could talk about how you balance that and also what role Twitter
is playing in your journalism.
Oh, yeah. Let me start with with that, maybe because Twitter is really interesting for me that that I
didn't really use Twitter until a few years ago and I was on a reporting trip and a colleague kind of
suggested to me and she she really liked Twitter and she explained to me how she was using it.
And I was super skeptical, but I started using it. And over the years, it's just grown in importance.
There's just a lot of scientists on there.
Like it's it's, you know, in the beginning, you know, maybe there were one or two stories a year
that I kind of where I saw someone tweet some new research and that got me interested in the
story came out of that. In this pandemic, Twitter has really become, you know, the platform, I think
where we're scientists to a certain extent. Also, policymakers and journalists are interacting
because we have so much research now that's being published as a pre-print.
So also than the normal, you know, I mean, a lot of science really still work with, you know, you
get an email from Science or Nature or a different journal telling you what's going to be published
next week. With the pre-prints you don't have that. So how do you even realize that there's a new
preprint online that's interesting? For me very often that's because the author, you know, is
tweeting, hey, we have a we have our new paper up and then other people will already chime in
and either, you know, take it apart or say what they find interesting about it. So you're already
getting a kind of live peer review a little bit while it's happening. And that already like it both points
your attention to stuff that might be interesting and already gives you a few interesting points that
you need to look at in the paper and people you might you might ask to comment on it. So that's
been incredibly helpful.
So I spent too much time on Twitter, I think, at this point. But but but it was in this spirit that I was
just spending a lot of time on it and I felt like I should also contribute in a way. And and then, of
course, we have this situation where there's so much bad information out there. So I felt if I'm
going to listen to the WHO press conferences anyway and I kind of have to write it down, I might 
as well try to make, you know, to do it in like little bite sizes that worked for me. I mean, it's almost
my own record. Like sometimes I go back in my in my Twitter history to find certain things
because I remember someone said it at one of the press conferences. So I used that for myself.
And at the same time, I just kind of put it out there as this is a source, you know, I mean, there's
stuff you can debate about the WHO, but this is a trusted source and what they say is important.
So so that's kind of how it started. And then yeah. And then it does take a lot of time. But I mean,
at the moment, since since COVID-19 is everything that I'm doing, it kind of works for me. I mean,
it's basically my reporting. I have to listen to these press conferences anyway. So I do I do this
these Twitter threads at the same time. And then when I've done the reporting for a story and the
story appears, it's what's a very good way to, you know, again, kind of post your story, but then
also give some background information and sometimes just give a little. It's just also like, you
know, going away a little bit from this kind of idea of, you know, the journalists. It's also just a nice
way of communicating. It's just different, the stuff that I can do in a thread on Twitter. In terms of
commenting a little bit, but also in terms of just using certain, you know, comparisons or just
telling a story in a slightly different way, it's just a really interesting medium to use. So in the
beginning, when I had a little bit more time, like I really liked having a finished story that was
appearing online and then writing a nice Twitter thread with it, then that might get people, you
know, people who might not even read the whole story, but they would be able to have that
thread at least. So I would when I teach journalism, I encourage everyone to the science forums
to really, really, you know, get on Twitter and try to to understand a little bit how they can make it
useful for themselves.
I mean, might not work for everyone, but certainly for me, it's been hugely helpful resource.
I think that's great advice on the idea of using it as online note-taking taking for yourself that
you're simultaneously sharing with other people as a gift as it's a really great way of framing that.
So last question, as you just said, you know, COVID-19 is the story and we don't know how long
it's going to be the story for all of us, for yourself. What do you what do you think the next stories
are the most important stories from this point forward? We're kind of moving from the end of the
big. So at the end of the beginning of the emergency into kind of the new normal of living with this
for an undefined period of time, what do you think you'll be covering or what are you watching
for?
So I think there's several ways of answering that. Right. I mean, something that I'm sure you've
also seen in your work always is once a story is big enough and I mean, doesn't get much bigger
than COVID-19.
You know, you have all of these other angles and other journalists jumping in to cover part of it.
So obviously, you know, we will be talking a lot about, you know, the economic fallout in the future
and the geopolitics of this. I think, you know, certainly what we've seen with the US government
that, you know, isn't able or willing to to protect its own citizens from something like this. You
know, you have to kind of wonder what that means in terms of the understanding of the world.
And so there's a lot of people who are, you know, have a better background than me in thinking
about this. And I'm really curious to to read their thoughts on some of these things. And for me as
a science journalist, I think it's going to the story in some ways is going to narrow a little bit in the
sense that I think that the actual science is going to become, people are going to become less
interested maybe in sometimes in parts of the science.
But of course, a lot of the really fascinating work only starts now. So there'll be, you know, look
back. I mean, we're going to we're still talking about the origin of this. That's going to be really
important. And we have to look at, you know, what have we learned from all of these measures
that were adopted like kind of haphazardly because nobody had any better ideas, like which ones
were an overreaction? What worked? In what context? I think there's also still a big question
about some of the countries that seem to have done quite well without sometimes a good
explanation for why.
So I think we'll have to wait a few weeks to see whether the virus will end up spreading in those
places as well, or whether, you know, there are factors that we don't quite understand yet that
that that help us. Seasonality will be a huge issue. You know, will it go down? And then, of course, 
we will be reading a lot about the whole idea of is there going to be a second wave? What kind of
you know, what what shape would it look like? How should we prepare for that?
And then, of course. So so there's the look back in some ways, and then there's the look to the
future. And then there's all of these new stories that are going to come up that we can't really
predict. Right. There's all of these drug trials going on. You know, some of that might work, some
of that, you know, that that would be a big story. We don't know whether the vaccines I mean,
there's so many vaccine candidates in the race now. You know? There might be problems with
the vaccine. I think one of the big topics, if it works, will be equitable distribution, both of
medicine and vaccines. I mean, you know, especially in this kind of global atmosphere where
there's a lot of nationalism, that's that's a big worry for me. How do we make sure that if we have
something that it gets distributed equitably across the globe? So so these kinds of debates are
for sure going to go on. And then there's other things like, you know, the virus might mutate. We
just don't know. We might find out that it has certain long term effects. I mean, we know that for a
lot of viruses. Right.
That's that's a super interesting story to me, but one that will only be able to answer when we
once we've actually had people who've had the virus, you know, a year ago or two years ago.
So so things like that. I think one of the things that fascinates me about science, the reason I'm a
science journalist, is that you you can't really say usually what story you're going to be working on
in a year. I mean, there's a lot of other areas of journalism where basically the debates are, you
know. Kind of similar all the time, like I feel like most of the stuff I write about today didn't exist
five years ago or ten years ago, you know, and so things might come up. Things might happen
that that we just haven't got on our radar right now. So that's the other thing. It kind of teaches
you as a science journalist to always keep an open mind because you you can't really exclude a
lot. You kind of have to see what comes up and what is interesting.
And then I think the other big thread is going to be misinformation. I think maybe, you know, a lot
of us science journalists, when we have a little bit more time to kind of focus on the meta topics,
that that's one, you know, we really need to look at. Like the way that science communication has
changed in this pandemic, how some people have exploited that and how that will change
science going forward. I I honestly think that science not just, you know, virology or outbreak
science. I think science as a whole is going to look different after this pandemic. And that's that's
a huge story for science journalist.
So I'm really struck by you're saying that as science journalists, we often don't know what the
next thing is that we're going to be covering. And one of the strangest things about this new
normal is that we know we're going to be writing about COVID-19 for the foreseeable future for all
of us, whatever it was we did beforehand. This is our beat. So thank you. Thank you for those
comments. And thank you so much for joining our course.
Thanks for having me, Maryn. 
