こんにちは。MOOC「パンデミックにおけるジャーナリズム：Covid-19の今と未来を取材する」へようこそ。
驚くべきことに、私たちは（コースの）折り返し地点を通過しました。私たちがここに至るまでの過程、そして（ウイルス）流行が世界にどんな経験をもたらしたのかを見てきました。
今週は、感染拡大の流れを変えるかもしれないものを記事にする機会を追求します：
Covid-19の治療法を達成する可能性、そして科学がワクチンを開発するかもしれないという希望について。
このセグメントでは、米疾病対策センターの元長官で、現在は製薬会社メルク（米国外ではMSDとして知られています）のEVP兼CCOであるジュリー・ガーバディング博士の話をお聞きします。
メルク社はコロナウイルスのワクチンを開発しており、以前にはエボラのワクチン開発も手掛けました。
また、パンデミックが始まって以来、治療法やワクチンを取材してきたWIRED誌のスタッフライター、ミーガン・モルテーニ氏にもお話を伺います。
そして補足として、オンライン誌「ヘルス・ニュース・レビュー」の創立者ゲイリー・シュバイツァー氏の話を聞くことができます。
記者を訓練し、医学を正確に取材する方法や誇大広告に抵抗する方法などを紹介します。
この2週間、暗黙のうちに見えてきたことの一つは、大半の国が資金が豊富で、公衆衛生システムを備えた先進国である西側諸国と、多くの国がそうではないグローバル・サウス（主に南半球に多い経済新興国）ではパンデミックの経験が異なることです。
ワクチンと治療法の検索は、その不平等を見直させます。私たちは皆、ゼロの状態にあります。
私たちが必要とするものをまだ誰も持っていないのです。パンデミックのこの側面をカバーするために、私たちは皆、同じ場所から出発しています。
誰もがこのパンデミックの流れを変えるものを渇望しています。最初に話すべきことは、その背後にあるもの、つまり、「これが効く」という偽の治療法をめぐる混乱です。
これは、先週話したことでもあります。誤報と虚偽の情報、そしてそれらに対抗する方法です。
最大の問題は、ヒドロキシクロロキンという薬です。これは古いマラリア治療薬で、フランスの研究者の研究により、Covid-19の治療薬として舞台に押し上げられ、シリコンバレーのテクノロジーの権威たちが取り上げました。
そして、それはホワイトハウスとそのお気に入りのニュースネットワーク、フォックスニュースにもてはやされたのです。
先週もヒドロキシクロロキンについて触れました。安価で安全だと考えられています。多くの点で理想的な薬、非常に強力な薬です。
米国政府は何百万回の用量にあたる薬を購入し、ブラジルの大統領はこの薬の使用に慎重姿勢を示した保健大臣を更迭。
サハラ以南のアフリカでは標準的な治療法となっています。
しかしながら、ヒドロキシクロロキンはその後の研究で治療効果がないと示されており、投与された患者は、投与されていない患者よりも死亡する可能性が高いかもしれないとのことです。
今週の読み物は、ヒドロキシクロロキンに関するものをいくつか用意しました。あなたの国ではどんな治療法が宣伝されているでしょうか？
それを推し進める人たちは、科学的な根拠を明らかにできますか？それができない場合、誰が利益を得るのかわかりますか？
その薬は地元で生産されているのでしょうか？製造工場を所有しているのは誰ですか？OK、これは偽の治療法について（考えるべきこと）です。
本当の治療法の話に戻りましょう。Covidの治療法や予防法を開発しない限り、私たちの生活は元通りにはなりません。
一縷の望みが治療法やワクチンにかけられているのです。それは病気になりたくない人々や患者を亡くしたくない医師たちの願いです。
しかし、開発を達成した企業は社会的な評判や金銭面での想像を絶する報酬がもたらされます。したがって、批判的・懐疑的ジャーナリズムの領分たる多くの誇大広告や詐欺が発生する可能性があります。
医薬品の承認を得るために必要なエビデンスを見てみましょう。「ゴールドスタンダード」と呼ばれる、最も信頼性の高いエビデンスが得られる研究は、次のように臨床試験のいくつかの段階を経ています。
「... 少数の人々だけを使用し、化合物の安全性のみをテストする第1相から、何千人もの人々に薬を投与し、既に市場に出回っている他の薬の有効性と比較して、作成者の意図した通りに機能するかどうかを確認する第3相まで実施します。
米国食品医薬品局、欧州医薬品庁、インドの中央医薬品標準管理機構、中国の国家薬品監督管理局などの主要な医薬品認可機関は、医薬品が市場に出回った後、第4相と呼ばれる更なる試験の実施を求めることがよくあります。
第4相では、企業が安全性と有効性に関する長期的な問題がないかどうかを調べ、規制当局に薬について追加の報告をするよう促します。



You should be aware, if you aren't already, that this process is not quick. From recognizing a
promising compound to getting a new drug licensed often takes from 10 to 15 years, and roughly
a billion U.S. dollars. It is an expensive, high stakes endeavor and in research terms, it's also high
risk? It's estimated that for every drug that makes it all the way to approval. Ten thousand
compounds fell out along the way.
Now, many treatments being looked at for Covid are drugs that already exist. Drug companies are
trying to repurpose drugs that were licensed for other diseases, and companies and academic
researchers are also scouring their libraries of compounds - which means, their collections of the
molecules that didn't look promising enough to develop into drugs.
Starting from an existing drug, or a compound that has undergone some evaluation means that
long the process of development can be shortenedm, but the journalistic responsibilities to
examine the process remain the same.
So when a drug is touted or licensed where you live, these are the sorts of questions you can ask.
Was there a clinical trial? If it wasn't a clinical trial, what kind of study was done? How many
people participated? How were the participants chosen? How many dropped out before the end?
Did any of them die? Was there a control group that received a placebo or another drug? What
side effects occurred? What were the goals of the study, which are usually called end points? And
where they changed along the way? And the participants who took this drug, would they have
gotten better even if they didn't?
Reporters asking those questions uncovered, for instance, that the much touted drug
hydroxychloroquine, which we were just talking about, had the side effect of causing severe heart
problems. And that in a study of another drug, remdesiver, which was heavily touted in the past
few weeks and has now become the standard of care in the United States, the endpoints of the
study were changed while the study was going on.
It's especially important to ask these questions because right now, much of the science around
Covid-19 is being shared not in medical journals, which put new science through a pretty rigorous
process of examination, but on sites called preprint servers. What that means is that the usual
examination of research for how strong and well-done it is will not have happened - so it's
especially important for journalists not to take claims at face value and ask the opinion of experts
who were not involved in the research.
Let's make a couple of points about vaccines. That multi-phase process of demonstrating that a
drug does what it says it does is usually even more complicated for vaccines and it may take
longer. That's because to prove a vaccine works, you must show that it works against natural
infection. In other words, you have to go where the disease is and administer it there, and then 
wait some uncertain period of time to determine that people were in fact exposed and protected.
That's unlike trials for curative drugs, which usually occur in hospitals or outpatient medical
settings among people who have been diagnosed with a condition already.
Now, a way to shortcut that process is to guarantee that people have been exposed to a disease
by deliberately trying to infect them. These are called human challenge studies, or sometimes
controlled human infections. These weren't done in past medical history, but in the modern era
they are considered out of bounds unless they are performed with full informed consent and after
review by authorities and medical ethics.
It's a measure of how serious this crisis is that experts and the World Health Organization are
talking about allowing human challenge studies. Some prominent medical ethicists have endorsed
the idea, and there is currently a nonprofit asking people to sign up to volunteer to be in such a
trial.
As of the first week of May, there were eight vaccine candidates in clinical trials and more than
100 in pre-clinical development - that is not yet at the point of being given to people - and that
was occurring in at least 12 countries. But there already are a lot of unrealistic expectations.
Here in the US, for instance. President Trump has said that he expects children to be vaccinated
before going back to school in the fall. Medical experts say that is impossible. The fastest you can
conduct a trial is 12 to 18 months. The quickest vaccine development recorded in history was for
the mumps vaccine, and that took 4 years. The Ebola vaccine that was rolled out in West Africa in
2016 was based on a vaccine candidate that was first achieved in 2003.
So for vaccines, the first complexity to look for is the science: How will it be made and tested?
The second is the hype: Is effectiveness overestimated, and is the delivery date too soon to be
realistic? The third, and this will be very important, is who gets first access to a vaccine that will
be needed for the entire world.
If a vaccine is achieved, there will not be one moment when doses for the entire world are
available at the same time. As the first doses trickle out, expect there to be ferocious competition
for them - and competition as well between a world view that says we are all in this together, and
one that says, every country must fight for itself.
In the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic, which we talked about in our first module, two countries
that housed flu vaccine manufacturing plants, Canada and Australia, stalled on agreements they
had made with the World Health Organization to release batches of vaccine for international
distribution. They held back the vaccine from their plants until their own citizens were taken care
of.
This could turn out to be interesting - because though vaccine development looks like an
industrialized-world endeavor, vaccine and pharmaceutical manufacturing is often cited in low
and middle income countries. This means that countries of the global south, which might feel at
risk of being squeezed out by the industrialized West, which has more money to spend, may turn
out to have a surprising amount of leverage in the vaccine race to come.
So to sum up: skepticism, rigor, looking for who benefits. These are our key journalistic tools, and
we'll need to apply them to the ongoing stories of treatments and vaccines. The possible arrival of
these defenses is essential to what we'll talk about in our final module, releasing next week: what
the world looks like from here. 
