MOOC「パンデミックにおけるジャーナリズム：COVID-19の現在と未来を取材する」へようこそ。
驚くべきことに、これが最後のモジュールです。今週の教材やアクティビティを終えれば、コース修了です。
挫折してしまっても、慌てないでください。コースの教材は5月31日以降も数週間は公開されています。
もしこのコースを知ったばかりの友人や同僚がいるならば、6月からは更新のない自己指導型のコースに変わり、対応する言語が追加されることに注意してください。
ですから、私たちを見つけに来てくれる人を励ましてください。
これが私からの最後のビデオメッセージになります。フェデリコ・ククソ、アマンダ・ロッシ、イヴ・シアマの3人の講師と共にこのコースをリードできたことは、とても光栄なことでした。
あなた方は素晴らしいグループで、賢く、貢献的で、思慮深く、勇敢です。あなた方のインストラクターになれたことを光栄に思います。
私はあなたがたと連絡を取り合う方法を見つけたい。そして、あなたの作品を見続けられればと思っています。
さて、最後のトピックは世界の今後についてです。
Over the past few weeks, we've
explored how this pandemic came to happen, but the experience of the pandemic has been
around the world. And what the hopes are for achieving vaccines and treatments. Now we're
going to look at what comes next.
To explore that, our last set of video segments includes some very distinguished people. We'll
hear from Dr. Tom Frieden, president and CEO of Resolve to Save Lives and former director of the
US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the administration of President Barack Obama.
Before that, Dr. Frieden was the health commissioner of New York City and an official in the World
Health Organization's tuberculosis program in India. We'll talk to Luis Felipe Lopez Calva, regional
director of the United Nations Development Program and Assistant Secretary General at the
United Nations. And we'll try to map the future with Annalee Newitz, who is both a journalist who
writes about the collapse of past societies, and a science fiction author who imagines near future
ones.
And finally, we'll hear from Bruce Shapiro, executive director of the Dart Center for Journalism and
Trauma at Columbia University, about what you should do, in the near term and looking forward to
keep yourselves healthy and safe.
So looking forward: what does that mean? We should admit it doesn't just mean the next two
years before a vaccine is - possibly - invented and distributed. What it means, if we are honest, is
the rest of our lives. The arrival of the novel coronavirus changed the world as we know it. We can
hope to repair the immediate damage that the pandemic has done, to families, economies and
societies. But we should not expect any of those to go back to what they were.
We may well be able to make all those better, but we should probably take as the basis of our
reporting that they will be different.
As I record this, the world has passed 5 million cases of the virus and the W.H.O. has recorded
the largest single day count of cases. There are very few places that can say they are past the
peak - and some localities that believed they were are already experiencing a bounceback of
fresh cases.
Yet we've been in this pandemic long enough, five solid months now, to have developed a bit of
familiarity with the virus and a bit of rhythm to our reporting. We are where the British Prime
Minister Winston Churchill said the allied armies were in World War II after their first solid victory:
This is not the end.
It's not even the beginning of the end,.
But it is, perhaps the end of the beginning. 
So where are our story opportunities, here at the end of the beginning? Let's talk about the near
future, and then what comes after.
Then your future: Every substantial report says that the immediate tasks are to test, trace and
isolate.
That is: Find out if people are sick, or if they show antibody evidence of recovery; trace their
contacts if they are sick; and persuade them to be confined safely, at home or in convalescent
housing, until they are no longer a danger to others.
Convalescent housing is especially important because so much Covid transmission seems to take
place in close quarters, in households or in spaces shared by several generations of a family.
I am sure you can immediately see the story opportunities here:.
Does your country or locality have enough tests? Where are the tests coming from? What is their
published rate of reliability? Is there any chance they could be counterfeit? How will your area
handle contact tracing?
There is an important nuance here for those of you who live in developing economies: Countries
where tuberculosis is extant already know how to do contact tracing, because contact tracing is
an essential part of detecting that disease. The United States and Western Europe have mostly
lost that skill, but the countries of the global south mostly retain it.
Testing and tracing are the minimal things necessary to open up economies, which the world
badly needs to do before we slide into a global economic depression. But they are at best means
of control, of reducing risk - not of making the risk go away.
Now, there are parts of our societies who have learned in the last few decades what it means to
live even to flourish in an atmosphere of uncertain risk. Primarily, that is, people living with or at
risk of acquiring HIV-AIDS.
We learned early in that pandemic that the only way to guarantee HIV-AIDS would not be passed
on was to agree to never have sex again, to never bear children again, to never take an illegal
drug again. And people were, of course, not willing to do those things.
But what people and societies were willing to do was to develop policies of harm reduction and
social mobilization: to 100% use condoms, to prevent mother-to-child transmission, to ensure
that people who use illegal drugs can do so safely.
We've also learned to live alongside the threat of dengue, of Zika, of malaria, to be continuously
protecting ourselves while continuing to live our lives. That's what life in the age of coronavirus
may turn out to be: an extended exercise in harm reduction.
That takes us into the middle term of the future. Assume that cities and businesses reopen: How
do they operate safely?
If you live in a major city like New York or Paris, how much of that city's streets will be converted
away from cars and toward the kind of public space you need to be socially distant?
If you reside in an area with a big tourism economy like the Mediterranean coast or Venice or the
Mexican coast, what will the process be for governments to that travelers back in again and get
them to follow new rules? If where you live is a place where there's a lot of solo small businesses,
or where people survive by informal pickup work, which describes a lot of Latin America and also
sub-Saharan Africa as well. How will people solicit work without breaking social distancing? How
will they participate in any kind of safety net or income restitution, if they were informal workers in
the first place? 
Once new forms of being together become more familiar - whether that is permanent social
distancing, or regular testing, or changing how shops and offices are organized or laid out, or
finding a way to greet each other that doesn't involve a handshake - we then have to look at the
far future. And here is where our ability to draw together strands of prediction and trend as
journalists will be so valuable.
Because the story opportunities in this part are the big ideas.
How much privacy will we give up in order to know where a disease is going?
Who will be allowed to own so much data about us?
Will the forces of labor rise up as they did after conflicts throughout the 19th and 20th centuries,
and probably further back and renegotiate the rules of work with business owners and
corporations?
Will we permit our governments to retreat behind nationalism in an attempt to keep us safe - or
will we recreate that burst of international sympathy and mutual commitment that created the
United Nations and the World Health Organization after the end of World War II.
There are two more things that we need to be asking about.
The first is how do we mourn what we've lost? You can look anywhere in the world and find
memorials to military battles. It is much harder to find memorials to those lost to disease. The
1918 flu, which we talked about in our first module, the worst pandemic in recorded history, has
almost no public art memorializing it: no place, no statues; no symphonies; in English, only two
slender novellas.
The most dramatic memorial to disease is probably the AIDS quilt, it's 1.3 million square feet of
fabric. It's the largest act of crowdsourced art in the world. What will be our quilt, for the lost of
COVIC-19, the people and the societies as we knew them? What acts of memory and resolve will
we undertake, so this moment is not forgotten?
The final story that we need to look forward to is this: What will our societies do if this happens
again? As a disease reporter, I am already hearing from scientists who talk about the next big one.
The really big one.
In our first module, we talked about failures to learn from past pandemics. Going forward from
this module, let us ask: What plans are being put in place, to detect the next one earlier? What
agencies are being funded? What science needs to be a priority? What weak spots did we
perceive in each of our cities and societies that made us vulnerable? What can we do as
journalists to keep those realizations in front of people's eyes, so that the lessons of Covid-19 are
acted on, and not lost?
So that's it. The end of the beginning, the immediate and far future, and what we need to look for
next as we live through this historic moment together. I wish you all so much success in
continuing to pursue what will be the story of our lifetimes.
I know you will do great work.
Stay safe 
