「パンデミックにおけるジャーナリズム：COVID-19の現在と未来を取材する」のビデオセグメントへようこそ。
今私たちはモジュール４にいます。これからの数年間に何が起きるのかを予想するこのコースも終わりを迎えようとしています。
今回はジャーナリストで作家のアナリー・ニューイッツさんにお話しいただきます。
アナリーさん、参加してくれてありがとう。

お招きいただきありがとうございます。


So we have at this point more than 9,000 students, and they come from more than 160 countries.
I'm not even sure what the count is today, but because they are so widely distributed, there is a
possibility that not all of them may know about your work. So can you tell us a little bit about
yourself and what you do?
Sure. So I am a science journalist. And in my career, which has lasted for about two decades now,
I've covered technology and biotechnology as well as evolution and ancient history, and I've
gotten to kind of do a lot of different poking around in different areas of science. I had a Knight
Science Journalism Fellowship like you did, Maryn. I recently in the last few years started writing
science fiction and thinking more about how I can write kind of at the nexus between informed
speculation and hard evidence. And I continue to do straightforward journalism for places like The
New York Times, New Scientist, Popular Science, lots of places with science in the title, and I also
publish science fiction novels as well as science books.
So I have a foot in both worlds. And my favorite thing to do is really think about how we can have
evidence-based predictions about where we're going to go next so that we can be prepared when
disasters happen or when good things happen, and we want to figure out how to allocate
resources for those.
So evidence-based prediction is exactly what I was hoping for, so thank you for that. The reason
that I wanted to have you come and talk to this class as we close it out is precisely because your
work exists at this nexus of fiction and nonfiction and looking at both past societies and imagining
future societies. So I want to ask you first about one of your nonfiction books, "Scatter, Adapt and
Remember," because in it you wrote this: "In its 4.5 billion year history, life on Earth has been
almost erased at least half a dozen times. We know that another global disaster is eventually
headed our way." Well, here we are in the midst of a global disaster. Is this what you were
envisioning?
In some ways it is. I do have a section of the book about pandemics and about how to model
pandemics and predict them, and in my thinking about possible disasters, pandemics were right
up there at the top. Of course, I didn't know what it would feel like to live through one, and all of
the different kinds of knock-on effects of being in a pandemic. But the sense I got from
researching that book, which really was about mass extinction, which are these huge events
where over 75% of all species on earth die out, so they're really quite intense and way beyond
anything that coronavirus could ever do.
But one of the things that I learned was that it's actually quite common to have these horrific
disasters that either wipe out a species or a whole bunch of species, and the kind of common
thread throughout the history of life on Earth is that bouncing back from these disasters is really
where things get interesting, and that life always does bounce back––so far, as far as we know.
And the result is often new ecosystems, new kinds of species, new ways that species interrelate.
And so, you know, humans are here and mammals are here because of all of these disasters, so
disasters can be productive, which is a very odd thing to be saying right now as we're in the
middle of this coronavirus pandemic.
But I think for me what's really interesting about thinking about disasters is all of the knock-on
effects from these disasters. Sort of how do they play into our political lives? How do they play
into, you know, what comes next for the planet and for humans?
So I'm going to ask you in a minute about what comes next, but for how things come back
together, let's talk about them falling apart. So in "Scatter, Adapt and Remember," and I think also 
in this new book that you have coming out, "Four Lost Cities, you talk about how societies come
apart. And so having that experience and having that knowledge, are there any things that you
see in the current moment with coronavirus that are particularly concerning to you?
Yeah, I mean, a lot of things. So one of the many knock-on effects of big disasters that are global
is that they tend to spark other global disasters, particularly if we haven't prepared for them. And
unfortunately, in the case of the coronavirus, especially in the United States, even though we
knew in the scientific community that this kind of pandemic was very likely to happen sooner
rather than later, we were not prepared on a political level.
Our federal governments, and state governments, and local governments had not stockpiled
materials to deal with this stuff. We didn't have coordination between different scientific
institutions to help combat it right away. And frankly, we don't have the international infrastructure
to deal with something on this level, and that's incredibly important whenever you're dealing with
something that's a global disaster, like climate change or like a pandemic. You've got to have
incredibly good communication between nations and trust between the scientific communities in
those nations. And, you know, we just don't have that right now, and one day I hope that we will.
And one of the things that I learned in "Scatter" and then also the book "Four Lost Cities," which
is coming out and is really focused on how human civilizations undergo massive transformations
and disasters, is that you really have to watch out for those additional problems.
So right now we're coping with the coronavirus, we're working on it. But as that's happening,
we're seeing our economy collapse. We're seeing our political institutions become more unstable.
We're seeing environmental problems exacerbated as regulations over environmental waste.
We're seeing more problems around climate change because environmental regulations are being
relaxed during these difficult times. And that place where multiple disasters pile up on each
other––political disaster on top of natural disaster, which then spawns another natural disaster––
that's when things get really pear shaped.
I was just listening to the California Report, which is a public radio program here in California,
dealing with the fact that now we're facing famine. We're facing starvation in California, even
though we have plenty of food, but lots of people are now undernourished and malnourished and
aren't able to eat. And so, again, there's another example of a knock-on effect, where what we're
suffering from is a pandemic, but what we wind up with is a pandemic with famine, political
instability, economic instability. And if you get enough of that, you start to look at really dramatic
changes happening in your society. Like something like a collapse or a revolution. Something that
could be really much more profound than a disease.
So out of that menu of things going wrong that you just rolled out. Thanks, I really asked for it.
I have more if you need them.
I do want to hear more because what I'm curious to know is, you know, out of this list you just
unveiled of things that are going wrong, do you have any sense of which of those are the
gnarliest? What will be the hardest to manage in the next couple of years?
That's a really good question, and partly the answer is that we can't know for sure. Because we
don't know how difficult it's going to be to come up with a vaccine for the COVID-19
coronavirus...Even if we come up with a vaccine within that 18-month window, which is purely
guesswork. Right? It could be 10 years. You know, we just don't know. Even once we have that,
we don't know how it will be distributed.
And I think that question of how it will be distributed, that's really where we need to be poking if
we want to think about really how unstable things could get. Because there's the scientific
solution to this problem, and then there's the political solution and the economic solution. And I
think that the scientific solution is a lot more straightforward than the economic and political
solution. So the answer to what is gnarly here––the gnarly part is our governments and seeing
how our governments respond to this very simple task, which is help your people to stay alive
using science. 
And that's a very simple thing to do, but once it gets involved with political infighting, gladhanding, and oligarchies, and people bribing each other, and all of the things that we know
happen in every nation, that's where it's going to get tough. And once things get tangled up in
those political issues, I think that's when you start to see these knock-on effects like famines and
increasing problems around toxins in the environment. That's because governments focus all their
energies on how they're going to give their brother the contract to manufacture these vaccines,
right, and so then they're not focusing on how do we safely manage our agricultural output. And
so, yeah, unfortunately, I think that there is no scientific cure for political instability, and I wish
there were. I think there are some people who believe there is. But, unfortunately, it's a social
cure, and those are the hardest to do. That's the hardest therapy is social therapy.
So let's talk about something hopeful.
OK. I'm ready.
So skittering over to the other side of the equation. One of the things that I love about your books
is that though you write about things that are quite dire, you write about the end of civilizations
and about the death of the dinosaurs, the death of the universe, you managed to find very hopeful
moments within it. And that's even more true, I think, in your fiction.
So I am wondering out of that trust in human creativity and community that you express in your
work, do you see any reason to be hopeful right now? Anything that you see in this huge menu of
bad stuff that you've just rolled out that actually does make you feel like things might be OK?
Yes, absolutely. I think there's always hope. I think that the moment that we stop trying to fix
everything out of hope, that that's really the darkest place. So even when you're in incredibly
difficult circumstances, aways continuing to do the work, whether that's the work in the lab,
whether that's work going out into the street and protesting a government that's unfairly
allocating food or medicine or political power, there's always hope in that.
And for me, I think the smallest unit of hope, like if we could measure it the way we sort of
measure like the smallest unit of like an atomic structure, the smallest unit of hope for me is
friendship and trust between people. And once you kind of have that, once you have communities
coming together to, like I said, work in a lab to figure out a vaccine or a therapy, or you have
political adversaries becoming allies, or you have a political group becoming allies with a spiritual
group. Anytime that happens when people are able to work together, you have the beginnings of
something better. And it's, of course, not always. There are always exceptions, and there are
always groups of people who get together and do bad things. And I don't want to downplay that.
But in general, when you're tackling a problem like this, which has many sides to it, political sides
and scientific sides, the more that you can have people coordinating, the better.
I also think that just to focus in on the coronavirus for a second and not kind of this bigger issue
of like how the climate is screwed and like politics are messed up. One of the things that we see
historically among humans is that whenever there is a massive disaster that's a pandemic, it
usually leads to progressive social change, particularly social change for workers. Because one of
the things that's happened, you know, starting even 1,000 years ago or more, is that when a
pandemic sweeps through a community, it really reminds people forcefully who the important
workers are in that community.
And it's always the people who are making food, who are growing food, people who are helping
to care for the sick, people who are in positions of educating the public. And those people in
everyday life, we often forget how important they are just to survival and just to making us have
lives that are worth living. And I think we're seeing that happen, at least here in the United States.
Suddenly people are having to acknowledge, oh, you know, the people who pick my food are
actually way more important than the guy who programed Zoom. You know? Or they're way more
important than the person who's like signing papers over at this federal building. And not to say
that those people aren't, you know, wonderful people, but if you're talking about the survival of
your species, those are the people who are important. 
And so, for example, after the first wave of bubonic plague in England, the 14th-century plague,
there was a wave of worker reforms. And for the first time in very many years in British history,
peasants were given better rights, workers' wages went up, and here in the United States, we're
seeing the beginnings of something like that. We're seeing workers going on strike for the first
time in sectors where they hadn't been organized before. So this goes back to what I was saying
about social connections between people like workers are getting together and organizing and
they're saying, "What's good for us?" Like, how can we get something out of this that protects
us? Not because we don't want to do the work, but because we do want to do this work. And we
want better protection. We want PPE. We want, you know, sick days, and we want health care.
Things that, you know, are just humane.
And so, again, we've seen this again and again throughout history that as societies reorganize
themselves in the wake of these kinds of natural and economic disasters, often that is an
opportunity for groups who have been marginalized to come forward and say, "No, we are
important," and actually be listened to. So that makes me very hopeful. The other thing that
makes me very hopeful coming out of the coronavirus is that a number of folks working on topics
around climate change already said this, which is that now we have a metaphor that people can
understand viscerally that has to do with how you prevent a long-term problem, like climate
change or a pandemic, how you prevent it from getting worse.
And the whole idea of flattening the curve of just not doing certain things in order to make the
world better for all of us. Now we can start talking about how that's relevant to the climate
because the exact same rules apply. Like we're doing little things every day, personally. We're
doing things at the level of our local and federal governments to combat this disease in the same
way that we need to do with climate change, and in the same way we need to do with carbon
emissions, and with toxic dumping, and with agricultural runoff, and the use of antibiotics in food.
And so these are all complex global problems, and I think now that people are ready to start
thinking that way. It's a very hard thing to do to wrap your brain around like, "OK, what I'm doing
now affects everybody around the world and potentially everybody for 10 or 20 years in the
future." That's hard. But I think now we're starting to understand. We're seeing how little things
that we do in our everyday life can actually be part of a big global effort, so that gives me hope as
well.
I think that when we come out of this period of quarantine and pandemic, we're gonna have new
groups of people who are at the table. New groups of workers, new groups of people who are
struggling for climate justice, finally actually getting to have their ideas put into policies. So that's
the hopeful outcome.
Thank you for that. Thank you for being hopeful. So let's put those two together. Sort of all the
negative stuff plus the reasons to potentially be hopeful. What in your best guess or in your
authorial imagination, what do the next couple of years look like to you? What does a year or two
years, five years, what do you imagine might happen?
Yeah, I mean, there are a lot of interesting ways to take that question. So I've partly already been
talking about it a little bit. I think there's going to be more labor organizing. I think there's going to
be more awareness of poverty and the terrible gini coefficients in various places. And at the same
time, I think that like to sidestep the sort of big stuff, I think we're going to see a lot of changes in
how people are interacting online.
So like I said, I have a background as a tech journalist, and I've been thinking a lot about how
we're using technology right now and how that's going to affect politics and education. The fact
that we're sitting here having this MOOC. You know, MOOCs have been around for a while, and
they've been really helpful. I think now they're going to become much more the norm. And one of
the things that's great about the MOOC, and this one, in particular, is that it's very international.
It's bringing together bodies of students that are normally not interacting with each other. And of
course, it's hard to interact with 6,000 other people in a MOOC. But the fact is that this is a small
moment of community that we're creating right now. 
This is a group of people from all over the world speaking many different languages who are
listening to the same ideas and who are going to come away from this class thinking differently
about how to do reporting, and how to do writing, and how to interact with their communities.
And I can't understate how radical and transformative that is. I think that's something that could
carry over into how we do our politics. I think obviously there's going to be a lot more emphasis
now on political engagement online. We're already, in the United States, we can now listen to the
Supreme Court deliberating over the phone, which is something that people just didn't have
access to before.
At one point in my career, I was very interested in a Supreme Court case that had to do with file
sharing, and I slept outside the Supreme Court all night waiting in line to get in to hear the
arguments, which was pretty exciting. I wouldn't want to do it now. It's like a lot easier to do that
when you're in your 20s. But that just means that, you know, people who don't have the ability to
go sleep outside the Supreme Court can now listen to how they're arguing over very important
issues.
So on the flip side, I think that we're going to see a change in how people interact in the real
world, too. I think it's very obvious that it's going to change social norms around how people sit
together, how they use transit in countries like the United States, where we're just terrible at
wearing masks. Like there's just no culture of mask-wearing here the way there is in Japan, and
China, and a lot of other countries where it's just normal. Like people wear masks all the time. You
know, it's going to really change how people look at each other.
And one of the things... Here is...an interesting knock-on effect. So in the United States and in a
lot of European countries, there are laws against people covering their faces in public, and
nominally those laws are supposed to discourage crime. But I think as many groups have pointed
out, they are basically laws that are intended to criminalize being Muslim, and for women who
want to wear a hijab or want to cover their faces.
And once we have normalized the idea in the United States that people need to be wearing
masks, I don't think those laws are going to be able to work anymore. And so I think weirdly, it
could give us some political freedoms that we didn't have before. Freedom of expression.
Freedom to wear what you want to wear and to not be criminalized for it, and that makes me
really happy. I just feel like that's a great outcome is that, you know, well, too bad your racist laws
will no longer be able to work if you want people to live.
So those are the kinds of things that I like to think about, like the weird little byways, the weird
effects of how public health will spill over into these other parts of our lives and potentially make
them better. There are obviously many ways that things will be worse.
I think the other thing that we're going to see going forward is an even greater emphasis on how
we're going to allocate health care spending. And this is especially important in countries like the
United States, where...we have a very thin amount of....We have a...How should I put this? We
don't really have a national health care system.
We do not.
I mean we have a thing that could be a national health care system. So I think we are going to see
a lot more public interest in how we're going to make health care more widely available. I think
that it just makes it so viscerally obvious that people will die.
And then finally, like again, these are all little things. I think we're going to see, you know, a lot
more interest in automation in terms of how to get into a place without touching the door, or how
to flush a toilet without touching the toilet, and things like that. And all this sounds really great.
You know, the idea that, you know, we'd have more technology helping us have classes and
technology helping us get through life without having to touch surfaces that might be
contaminated.
But where I would end this speculation is by saying that all of these things are going to once more
call attention to the incredible division between the haves and have nots because there are going 
to be the people who can afford to have a computer that allows them to take a MOOC, that can
afford to work in a building or live in a building that has automation, that can even have jobs. And
there's going to be the vast majority of people who don't have health care, who are working in
dangerous jobs and aren't being compensated for it.
So I think, again, all of this stuff comes back to this question of how are we going to deal with our
essential workers who have been mistreated and marginalized. So, yeah, I think the next three to
five years are going to be full of issues around worker rights, health care, and a lot of online
classes.
Including this one.
Yeah.
Which all of us, I think I speak for all of us, when I say thank you for calling this MOOC radical and
transformative.
I mean, just calling it like I see it.
Well, thanks so much. These were really fantastic thoughts. Thanks for joining our class.
Yeah, thanks for having me. Good luck. 
